UNVEILED HIS 2014 BUDGET PLAN
TODAY, CALLING FOR CHANGES TO
MEDICARE AND SOCIAL SECURITY,
PLUS MORE TAX HIKES FOR THE
WEALTHY.
GOOD EVENING, I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Woodruff: AND I'M JUDY
WOODRUFF.
ON THE "NEWSHOUR" TONIGHT, WE
GET TWO TAKES ON THE BUDGET
PROPOSAL FROM WHITE HOUSE
ECONOMIC ADVISER GENE SPERLING
AND HOUSE G.O.P.ONFE CRENCE
CHAIR CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS.
>> Ifill: THEN, WITH A SENATE
COMPROMISE ON BACKGROUND CHECKS
BREATHING NEW LIFE INTO A
COMPREHENSIVE GUNS BILL,
WE LOOK AT GUN VIOLENCE IN THE
NATION'S CITIES.
>> Woodruff: PAUL SOLMAN RETURNS
TO NEW YORK CITY'S RIKER'S
ISLAND TO EXPLORE ONE WAY TO
KEEP TEENS FROM RETURNING TO
JAIL: BEHAVIORAL THERAPY.
>> IF WE WANT TO CHANGE OUTCOMES
WE HAVE TO CHANGE BEHAVIOR, AND
IF WE WANT TO CHANGE BEHAVIOR
FOR THE LONG RUN, WE HAVE TO
CHANGE THE WAY WE THINK.
>> Ifill: MARGARET WARNER LOOKS
AT A BILLION DOLLAR TROVE OF
PICASSO AND OTHER IMPORTANT
CUBIST WORKS, GIVEN BY ONE MAN
TO THE METROPOLITAN MUSEUM OF
ART.
>> Woodruff: AND WE CLOSE WITH A
CUBAN ACTIVIST'S REFLECTIONS ON
FREEDOM, OPPRESSION AND LIFE AS
A DISSIDENT IN HER HOME COUNTRY.
>> Ifill: THAT'S ALL AHEAD ON
TONIGHT'S "NEWSHOUR."
>> Woodruff: THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION HAS ROLLED OUT A
NEW BUDGET, BUT IT WAS CLEAR
TODAY THE PLAN IS IN FOR A BUMPY
RIDE.
DEMOCRATS OBJECTED TO PROVISIONS
TO SAVE MONEY ON MEDICARE AND
SOCIAL SECURITY.
REPUBLICANS DISMISSED ANY TALK
OF RAISING TAXES AGAIN ON THE
WELL-OFF.
"NEWSHOUR" CONGRESSIONAL
CORRESPONDENT KWAME HOLMAN
BEGINS OUR COVERAGE.
>> Reporter: THE PRESIDENT'S
PLAN ARRIVED AT THE CAPITOL THIS
MORNING, BEARING A PRICE TAG OF
$3.8 TRILLION FOR THE COMING
FISCAL YEAR.
AND THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE MADE HIS
PITCH, IN THE WHITE HOUSE ROSE
GARDEN.
>> IF WE WANT TO KEEP REBUILDING
OUR ECONOMY ON A STRONGER, MORE
STABLE FOUNDATION, THEN WE'VE
GOT TO GET SMARTER ABOUT OUR
PRIORITIES AS A NATION.
THAT'S WHAT THE BUDGET I'M
SENDING TO CONGRESS TODAY
REPRESENTS.
>> Reporter: THE BLUEPRINT AIMS
TO REDUCE THE DEFICIT BY ANOTHER
$1.8 TRILLION OVER TEN YEARS.
THAT'S ON TOP OF $2.5 TRILLION
IN REDUCTIONS AGREED TO AT THE
END OF LAST YEAR.
THE CUTS IN THIS NEW BUDGET ALSO
REPLACE MOST OF SEQUESTRATION--
THOSE ACROSS-THE-BOARD SPENDING
REDUCTIONS THAT ALREADY HAVE
BEGUN TAKING EFFECT.
TO MAKE IT ALL POSSIBLE, THE
PRESIDENT WOULD RAISE $580
BILLION IN NEW REVENUE FROM
HIGHER TAXES ON THE WEALTHY.
AND, HE ANTICIPATED REPUBLICAN
OBJECTIONS.
>> IF ANYONE THINKS I'LL FINISH
THE JOB OF DEFICIT REDUCTION ON
THE BACKS OF MIDDLE-CLASS
FAMILIES, OR THROUGH SPENDING
CUTS ALONE-- THAT ACTUALLY HURT
OUR ECONOMY IN THE SHORT-TERM--
THEY SHOULD THINK AGAIN.
WHEN IT COMES TO DEFICIT
REDUCTION, I'VE ALREADY MET
REPUBLICANS MORE THAN HALF-WAY.
>> Reporter: BUT ON THE SENATE
FLOOR THIS MORNING, REPUBLICAN
LEADER MITCH McCONNELL REJECTED
THE PRESIDENT'S MATH.
>> WHEN YOU CUT THROUGH THE SPIN
AND GET TO THE FACTS, IT LOOKS
LIKE THERE'S LESS THAN $600
BILLION WORTH OF REDUCTION IN
THERE AND THAT'S OVER A DECADE.
ALL OF IT COMING, NOT
SURPRISINGLY, FROM TAX
INCREASES.
IN OTHER WORDS, IT'S NOT A
SERIOUS PLAN.
>> Reporter: MR. OBAMA HOPED
REPUBLICANS WOULD APPRECIATE
$400 BILLION IN SAVINGS FROM
MEDICARE AND OTHER HEALTH
PROGRAMS, PLUS LOWER COST-OF-
LIVING ADJUSTMENTS FOR SOCIAL
SECURITY.
>> I DON'T BELIEVE ALL THESE
IDEAS ARE OPTIMAL, BUT I'M
WILLING TO ACCEPT THEM AS PART
OF A COMPROMISE, IF AND ONLY IF
THEY CONTAIN PROTECTIONS FOR THE
MOST VULNERABLE AMERICANS.
>> Reporter: HOUSE SPEAKER JOHN
BOEHNER SAID HE DOES GIVE MR.
OBAMA SOME CREDIT FOR MOVING ON
ENTITLEMENTS, BUT NOT AT THE
PRICE OF HIGHER TAXES.
>> I WOULD HOPE THAT HE WOULD
NOT HOLD HOSTAGE THESE MODEST
REFORMS FOR HIS DEMAND FOR
BIGGER TAX... HIKES.
LISTEN, WHY DON'T WE DO WHAT WE
CAN AGREE TO DO.
WHY DON'T WE FIND THE COMMON
GROUND THAT WE DO HAVE, AND MOVE
ON THAT.
>> Reporter: WHILE SPEAKER
BOEHNER AND OTHER REPUBLICANS
WELCOMED THE PRESIDENT'S OFFER
ON ENTITLEMENTS, MANY DEMOCRATS
VOICED DISPLEASURE.
THEY SAID THE CHANGES IN SOCIAL
SECURITY AND MEDICARE WOULD HURT
SENIORS AND OTHER AMERICANS
STRUGGLING TO MAKE ENDS MEET.
ARIZONA REPRESENTATIVE RAUL
GRIJALVA IS CO-CHAIR OF THE
CONGRESSIONAL PROGRESSIVE
CAUCUS.
>> QUITE FRANKLY, SOCIAL
SECURITY DOES NOT CAUSE THE
DEFICIT.
IT SHOULD BE A SEPARATE
DISCUSSION AWAY FROM THIS WHOLE
BUDGET ISSUE.
AND IT'S BEEN A TROPHY THE
REPUBLICANS HAVE WANTED SINCE
I'VE BEEN HERE FOR TEN YEARS, TO
BEGIN TO UNDO SOCIAL SECURITY.
I DON'T THINK DEMOCRATS SHOULD
HAND THEM THAT OPPORTUNITY
READILY.
>> Reporter: THE BUDGET DOES
INCLUDE NEW SPENDING THAT
DEMOCRATS CAN SUPPORT-- ON JOBS,
INFRASTRUCTURE AND EXPANDED PRE-
SCHOOL EDUCATION.
THAT LAST ITEM WOULD BE FUNDED
BY A 94-CENT INCREASE IN THE
FEDERAL TAX ON A PACK OF
CIGARETTES.
NOW, IT FALLS TO THE PRESIDENT
TO TRY TO SELL HIS PLAN TO BOTH
SIDES.
HE'S SCHEDULED TO HOST A DOZEN
REPUBLICAN SENATORS AT THE WHITE
HOUSE FOR DINNER THIS EVENING.
>> Ifill: FOR REACTION TO THE
PRESIDENT'S BUDGET, WE GO TO
CAPITOL HILL AND THE WHITE
HOUSE.
REPRESENTATIVE CATHY McMORRIS
RODGERS OF WASHINGTON STATE IS
THE CHAIRWOMAN OF THE REPUBLICAN
CONFERENCE.
I SPOKE WITH HER A SHORT TIME
AGO FROM THE CAPITOL.
>> Ifill: FOR THE VIEW FROM THE
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS,
WELCOME.
THANK YOU FOR JOINING US.
AS WE LOOK AT THE PRESIDENT'S
BUDGET PROPOSAL TODAY, WHO DO
YOU THINK ARE THE WINNERS AND
LOSERS?
>> I THOUGHT THE WINNERS WERE
THOSE PEOPLE WH THAT-- WELL,
SEE, IT'S HARD FOR ME TO QUICKLY
THINK OF WINNERS.
I THOUGHT THE LOSERS AT LEAST
WERE THE AMERICAN PEOPLE IN THE
ASPECT THAT IT WASSA LOTS OF THE
SAME OLD FROM THE PRESIDENT.
IT WAS MORE TAXES, MORE
SPENDING, ANOTHER STIMULUS.
THESE POLICIES HAVE NOT GOT OUR
ECONOMY GROWING, AND JUSTOOK L
AT THE JOBS REPORT.
IT WAS-- IT SHOWED THAT WE HAVE
THE LEAST NUMBER EMPLOYED TODAY
AS WE HAVE SINCE 1979.
WE'RE NOT HEADED IN THE RIGHT
DIRECTION.
AND SO IT'S HARD FOR ME TO THINK
OF THE WINNERS RIGHT NOW.
>> Ifill: THE PRESIDENT SAID
TODAY HE FEELS LIKE HE'S GONE
HALFWAY, ESPECIALLY BY OFFERING
ENTITLEMENT REFORM WHAT, HE HAD
ON THE TABLE BEFORE WHEN HE
TALKED TO HOUSE SPEAKER
BOEHNER.
DO YOU AGREE WITH HIM ON THAT OR
DISAGREE?
>> BUT THE REST OF THAT STORY
THAT WAS HE ALSO WAS DEMANDING
MORE TAX REVENUE, AND THE
PRESIDENT GOT $600 BILLION IN
NEW TAX REVENUE ON JANUARY 1.
AND THE REPUBLICANS, WE BELIEVE
IT IS TIME TO ADDRESS THE OTHER
SIDE OF THIS EQUATION, THE
SPENDINGS, THE OUT-OF-CONTROL
SPENDING, THE RECORD DEFICITS,
AND THAT'S WHY WE PUT FORWARD A
BUDGET THAT BALANCES WITHIN 10
YEARS, AND WE CHALLENGE THE
PRESIDENT, WE CHALLENGE THE
SENATE DEMOCRATS, TO COME UP
WITH A BUDGET THAT BALANCES
WITHIN 10 YEARS.
AND PART OF THAT MAY BE TAX
REFORM.
IT MAY BE ENTITLEMENT REFORM,
MAKING SURE THAT THESE PROGRAMS
ARE AVAILABLE FOR OUR SENIORS,
IMPORTANT SAFETY NET PROGRAMS.
BUT THE PRESIDENT CONTINUES TO
DEMAND MORE TAX REVENUE INSTEAD
OF LOOKING AT THE SPENDING SIDES
OF THIS EQUATION.
>> Ifill: I WANT TO ASK YOU
WITH SOME OF THAT, BECAUSE ONE
OF THE DETAILS IN HIS PLAN WOULD
CALL FOR A COUPLE OF RETIRED
COUPLES TO EARN MORE THAN
$170,000 A YEAR TO PAY A HIGHER
MEDICARE PREMIUM.
IS THAT NOT THE TYPE OF
ENTITLEMENT REFORM HUIN MIND?
>> THE REPUBLICANS, WE WANT TO
WORK ON THIS.
WE BELIEVE IT IS IMPORTANT THAT
WE ADDRESS MEDICARE AND WE PUT
IT ON A PATH SO IT IS GOING TO
BE AVAILABLE FOR OUR CURRENT
SENIORS AND THE NEXT
GENERATION.
AND WE NEED TO HAVE THIS TYPE
OF DISCUSSION WITH THE
PRESIDENT.
HE'S BEEN VERY RELUCTANT WHEN
PUSH COMES TO SHOVE, THOUGH, TO
REALLY MOVE FORWARD ON THESE
KIND OF REFORMS WITHOUT THEIR
BEING-- HE CONTINUES TO SAY
THERE HAS TO BE MORE TAX REVENUE
ON THE TABLE.
>> Ifill: SPEAKING OF TAX
REVENUES, ONE OF THE THINGS HE
SUGGESTED IS RAISING THE
CIGARETTE TAX, DOUBLING THE
CIGARETTE TAX TO PAY FOR
PRE-K INITIATIVES.
THAT IS NOT A TRADE-OFF YOU WILL
AGREE WITH?
>> AGAIN, HE ALWAYS COMES BACK
TO RAISING TAXES.
THE AMERICAN PEOPLE-- JUST ON
JANUARY 1, EVERY AMERICAN FAMILY
SAW THAT THEIR PAYCHECK WAS
REDUCED BECAUSE TAXES WENT UP.
AND SO WE NEED-- WE NEED THE
PRESIDENT TO JOIN IN AN EFFORT
TO REALLY LOOK AT THE SPENDING
SIDE OF THIS EQUATION.
HIS DEFAULT ALWAYS SEEMS TO BE
TAKING MORE MONEY.
AND THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
CONTINUES TO GROW.
IT MEANS IT MAKES IT HARD OR
FAMILIES.
THEY HAVE TO TIGHTEN THEIR
BELTS.
>> Ifill: NO MATTER WHAT THE
MONEY IS BEING RAISED FOR,
RAISING TAXES ITSELF IS A
PROBLEM.
>> YES, THE REPUBLICANS
RECOGNIZE THAT WE HAVE A
SPENDING PROBLEM.
THE PRESIDENT-- EARLY ON IN HIS
TIME SAID HE WAS GOING TO REDUCE
THE DEFICIT IN HALF BY THE END
OF HIS FIRST TERM.
AND WE NEED THE PRESIDENT, WE
NEED THE DEMOCRATS TO LOOK AT
THE SPENDING SIDE, THE
TRILLION-DOLLAR DEFICITS.
THEY JEOPARDIZE OUR
OPPORTUNITIES AND ECONOMIC
GROWTH AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR
YOUNG PEOPLE GRADUATING FROM
COLLEGE, AND IT JEORDIZPAES
IMPORTANT SAFETY NET PROGRAMS
FOR OUR SENIORS.
SO THAT IS WHERE THE REPUBLICANS
ARE STANDING FIRM.
THE PRESIDENT GOT REVENUE ON
JANUARY 1.
WE NEED TO LOOK AT THE SPENDING
SIDE.
>> Ifill: ONE OF THE THINGS
YOU TALK ABOUT, ABOUT SAFETY
NETS.
ONE OF THE SAFETY NETS IS SOCIAL
SECURITY, AND DEMOCRATS ARE
UNHAPPY WITH THE PRESIDENT'S
PLAN TO CHANGE THE FORMULA FOR
COST OF LIVING INCREASES TO
SOCIAL SECURITY.
DO YOU THINK THAT'S THE RIGHT
APPROACH?
>> IT'S CERTAINLY ONE I THINK WE
NEED TO LOOK AT CLOSER.
AND THAT IS A-- YOU KNOW,
REPUBLICANS AND DEMOCRATS I
BELIEVE WE MAY BE ABLE TO FIND
SOME COMMON GROUND HERE AND
THOSE ARE THE KIND OF SOLUTIONS
THAT DO GIVE ME HOPE MOVING
FORWARD THAT WE CAN FIND THE
COMMON GROUND SO THAT THESE
PROGRAMS ARE SECURE FOR MANY
GENERATIONS TO COME.
>> Ifill: BOTTOM LINE, DO YOU
SEE ANY DIFFERENCE FROM WHERE
THE PRESIDENT'S PLAN WAS TODAY
FROM WHEN IT WAS WHEN YOU WERE
NEGOTIATING WITH HIM IN
DECEMBER?
>> I-- I WAS DISAPPOINTED THAT
HE CONTINUED TO MAKE IT ALL
DEPENDENT UPON THEIR BEING NEW
TAX REVENUE.
AND THAT HAS-- YOU KNOW, FROM
THE REPUBLICANS' PERSPECTIVE, HE
GOT $600 BILLION ON JANUARY 1.
AND WE NEED THE PRESIDENT TO
JOIN US IN LOOKING AT THE
SPENDING SIDE.
>> Ifill: REPRESENTATIVE CATHY
McMORRIS RODGERS, THANK YOU SO
MUCH.
>> THANK YOU, GWEN.
>> Ifill: FOR THE VIEW FROM
THE WHITE HOUSE I SPOKE WITH
GENE SPERLING, DIRECTOR OF THE
PRESIDENT'S ECONOMIC COUNCIL.
GENE SPERLING, THANK YOU FOR
JOINING US, THE PRESIDENT SAID
TODAY IN THE ROSE GARDEN WHAT HE
WAS PROPOSING IS NOT OPTIMAL, IS
THE WORD HE USED, BUT HE NEEDED
TO GO THIS FAR FOR COMPROMISE.
SO FAR, BOTH SIDES SEEM TO BE
REJECTING THIS.
WELL, THE PRESIDENT RIGHTLY SAID
THAT HE WAS PUTTING FORWARD
TODAY SOMETHING THAT WAS
UNQUESTIONABLY A COMPROMISE
OFFER TO SPEAKER BOEHNER TO TRY
TO GET A BALANCED DEFICIT
REDUCTION PACKAGE THAT WOULD GET
US OUT OF THIS VERY HARMFUL
SEQUESTER, DEAL WITH SOME OF OUR
LONG-TERM FISCAL CHALLENGES, AND
PUT US ON A PATH TO BOTH
LOWERING OUR DEFICIT, BUT ALSO
STILL INVESTING IN JOBS RIGHT
NOW, BY ACCELERATING
INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENTES, AND
INVESTING IN OUR LONG-TERM
COMPETITIVENESS.
AND THE PRESIDENT SAID ALL ALONG
THAT WE'RE NOT GOING TO GET THAT
TYPE OF A COMPROMISE UNLESS
EVERYBODY IS WILLING TO GIVE A
LITTLE.
NO ONE IS GOING TO GET 100%.
AND THE PRESIDENT'S VERY CLEAR--
THIS IS NOT HIS IDEAL PROPOSAL
BUT IT SHOWS HIS WILLINGNESS TO
TAKE A BALANCED APPROACH.
IT DOES ASK FOR THE MOST
FORTUNATE TO HAVE A LITTLE BIT
LESS TAX EXPENDITURES AND TAX
LOOPHOLEES, AND SENSIBLE
ENTITLEMENT REFORMS AND AGAIN
MEASURES HE MIGHT PREFER NOT
DOING BUT REALIZES YOU NEED TO
HAVE OUT TO BE PART OF A
BIPARTISAN COMPROMISE TO SEE IF
WE CAN MOVE OUR COUNTRY
FORWARD.
>> Ifill: WE JUST SPOKE TO A
MEMBER OF THE HOUSE LEADERSHIP,
CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, AND
SHE SAID SHE COUL'T TDNHINK OF
ANY WINNERS IN THIS BUDGET
PROPOSAL.
>> WELL DEFICIT REDUCTION IS
NEVER EASY.
WE INHERITED THIS TERRIBLE
DEFICIT ALONG WALL STREET-- A
GREAT RECESSION, AND WE'RE
FIGHTING OUR WAY OUT OF IT, AND
THE QUESTION IS HOW TO DO IN A
WAY NAGETS THE BALANCE RIGHT,
AND THE BALANCE IS ABOUT HAVING
SENSIBLE ENTITLEMENT SAVINGS,
BUT ALSO HAVING REVENUES AS PART
OF A FAIR DEFICIT REDUCTION
PLAN.
THE BALANCE IS ALSO ABOUT MAKING
SURE YOUR FUNDAMENTAL GOAL IS
ABOUT ECONOMIC GROWTH AND JOB
CREATION, AND THE TYPE OF PLAN
THE PRESIDENT HAS DOES HAVE
TARGETED INVESTMENTS TO CREATE
JOB, INVESTMENTS FOR WORKER
TRAINING.
YOU SAW HIS PRESCHOOL PROPOSAL.
THAT WOULD BE VERY IMPORTANT.
AND IT DOES MAINTAIN INVESTMENTS
IN OUR FUTURE, IN MANUFACTURING,
AND IN THE SKILLS OF OUR
WORKERS.
BUT THE FACT IS, WE ALL HAVE TO
TRY TO GET OURSELVES BACK ON A
LONG-TERM FISCAL PATH SO WE CAN
GIVE PEOPLE MORE CONFIDENCE THAT
AMERICA IS STILL THE PLACE TO
CREATE JOBS AND MAKE YOUR
FUTURE.
AND THAT'S GOING TO REQUIRE SOME
TOUGH CHOICES.
>> Ifill, AND YET REPUBLICANS
ARE NOT HAPPY BECAUSE THEY SAY
THIS IS ALL ABOUT TAXES GOING UP
AGAIN, AND SOME DEMOCRATS ARE
NOT HAPPY BECAUSE THEY THINK
YOU'RE HURTING THE POOR.
YOU'RE NOT WINNING ON EITHER
SIDE OF THIS.
>> GWEN, I LOOK AT IT IN A
DIFFERENT WAY.
WHEN YOU SEE THE PRESIDENT OF
THE UNITED STATES LOOKING WHAT
HE SHOULD DO-- LEAD-- BRING BOTH
SIDES TOGETHER.
AND, YES, THIS IS NOT GOING TO
BE IDEAL FOR EVERYONE.
BUT THE QUESTION IS NOT WHETHER
IT'S IDEAL FOR DEMOCRATS OR
IDEAL FOR REPUBLICANS BUT
WHETHER IT IS AN HONORABLE
COMPROMISE THAT IS GOOD FOR
JOBS, GOOD FOR GROWTH, GOOD FOR
THE AMERICAN PEOPLE.
AND THAT'S GOG REQUIRE EVERYONE
TO GIVE A LITTLE AND BE UNHAPPY
ON A FEW MEASURES.  IF IN DOING
THAT, WE CAN REPLACE THE
SEQUESTER THAT IS HARMING
MILLIONS OF ISN'T PEOPLE,
HURTING JOB GROWTH, AND REPLACE
IT WITH SOMETHING THAT IS GOOD
FOR JOB GROWTH, HAS A BALANCE OF
ENTITLEMENT SAVINGS AND REVENUES
AND HELPS PUT OUR DEFICIT ON A
STRONG PATH, THAT'S GOING TO
GIVE MORE CONFIDENCE.
THAT'S GOING TO BE GOOD FOR
JOBS.
THAT'S GOING TO BE GOOD FOR OUR
COMPETITIVENESS, AND THAT'S OUR
BIGGER PERSPECTIVE THAT ALL OF
US HAVE TO TAKE IF WE'RE GOING
TO TRY TO GET BY DIVIDED
GOVERNMENT TO DO SOMETHING
THAT'S UNIFIED THAT CAN HELP US
STRENGTHEN OUR ECONOMY.
>> Ifill: BEFORE YOU GET BY
DIVIDE GOVERNMENT YOU HAVE TO
HAVE AGREEMENT.
YOU HAVE AN AGREEMENT THAT YOU
SAY YOU HAD ON THE TABLE LAST
YEAR WITH SPEAKER BOEHNER.
IT DIDN'T GO THROUGH THEN.
TAXING THE WEALTHIEST DIDN'T
WORK BEFORE.
HOW IS IT GOING TO WORK NOW?
>> YOU KNOW, DESPITE ALL OUR
PROBLEMS AND ALL OUR CHALLENGES,
GENTLEMEN, WE ACTUALLY HAVE
LOWERED THE DEFICIT BY $2.5
TRILLION, AND THAT HAS BEEN A
MIX OF $600 BILLION IN REVENUES
ON HIGH-INCOME INDIVIDUALS,
THERE HAVE BEEN SPENDING CUTS
AND REDUCED DEFICIT ON LOWER
PROJECTED INTEREST COSTS.
IT HAS BEEN TOUGH BUT WE HAVE
MADE PROGRESS AND WE HAVE TO
STAY AT IT, AND I THINK THAT'S
GOING TO BE THE CHALLENGE.
NOW, THE PRESIDENT TONIGHT IS
GOING TO BE MEETING AND HAVING
DINNER WITH 12 REPUBLICANS,
BECAUSE THE PRESIDENT IS LOOKING
AT EVERY MOMENT FOR WHAT HE
CALLS THE CAUCUS OF COMMON
SENSE.
AND I WILL REPEAT THAT ONE THING
WE HAVE GOING FOR US IS THAT THE
AMERICAN PUBLIC WANTS US TO WORK
TOGETHER.
THEY WANT TO US COMPROMISE.
THEY WANT US TO HAVE A BALANCED
PLAN THAT'S GOOD FOR GROWTH,
INVEST IN OUR PEOPLE AND DEALS
WITH OUR LONG-TERM DEFICIT.
AND I THINK THAT THAT'S WHAT
THIS PRESIDENT IS TRYING TO DO
IN PUTTING FORWARD THE BUDGET HE
DID TODAY.
>> Ifill: LET ME ASK YOU
FINALLY, TONIGHT'S DINNER, IS
THAT THE FIRST STEP TOWARDS THE
GRAND BARGAIN EVERYONE IS
TALKING ABOUT OR ANOTHER STEP
TOWARDS BUSINESS AS USUAL IN THE
BUDGET?
>> I THINK IT IS UNDER STEF IN
THE PRESIDENT'S OUTREACH TO LOOK
FOR THOSE WHO WANT TO BE PART OF
A SOLUTION.
AND HE DID A PREVIOUS DINNER
WITH 11 OR 12 REPUBLICANS, THAT
I THINK WAS VERY GOOD IN
CREATING SOME TRUST, STARTING TO
SEE THAT THERE CAN BE SOME
COMMON GROUND, AND MOVING TOWARD
WHERE'S I THINK THE AMERICAN
PUBLIC WOULD LIKE, WHICH IS TO
SAY US IN WASHINGTON, EVEN WITH
DIVIDED GOVERNMENT, WILLING TO
MAKE HONORABLE COMPROMISES THAT
ARE GOING TO BE GOOD FOR OUR
ECONOMY AND GOOD FOR JOB
CREATION, AND I THINK WE'LL ALL
BE BETTER OFF, AND HIS BUDGET IS
AN IMPORTANT STEP IN DOING THAT,
AND HIS OUTREACH IS ONE MORE
STEP AGAIN IN LOOKING FOR THAT
COALITION OF THE WILLING, THAT
CAUCUS OF COMMON SENSE, THAT IS
WILLING TO WORK TOGETHER AND TRY
TO STRIKE COMPROMISE THAT'S GOOD
FOR JOBS AND THE ECONOMY.
>> Ifill: GENE SPERLING AT THE
WHITE HOUSE, THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU, AGAIN.
>> Woodruff: STILL TO COME ON
THE "NEWSHOUR": COMBATING URBAN
VIOLENCE; KEEPING TEENS OUT OF
JAIL; GIVING A BILLION DOLLARS
WORTH OF ART AND LIVING AS A
CUBAN DISSIDENT.
BUT FIRST, THE OTHER NEWS OF THE
DAY.
HERE'S HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: THOUSANDS OF
PEOPLE GATHERED IN WASHINGTON
TODAY, PRESSING CONGRESS TO
APPROVE IMMIGRATION REFORMS.
SENATORS HOPE TO FINISH WORK
THIS WEEK ON A BILL THAT GRANTS
A PATH TO CITIZENSHIP FOR 11
MILLION IMMIGRANTS LIVING
ILLEGALLY IN THE U.S.
SUPPORTERS RALLIED AT THE U.S.
CAPITOL, WITH SIGNS THAT READ
"TIME IS NOW, ALL IN FOR
CITIZENSHIP".
RALLIES ALSO TOOK PLACE IN AT
LEAST 18 STATES.
A NEW WARNING CAME TODAY, AMID
THE TENSE WAITING FOR NORTH
KOREA'S NEXT MOVE.
THE FOREIGN MINISTER OF SOUTH
KOREA SAID CHANCES ARE
CONSIDERABLY HIGH THAT THE NORTH
WILL LAUNCH A MID-RANGE MISSILE
SOON.
IT COULD COINCIDE WITH NEXT
MONDAY, WHEN THE COMMUNIST STATE
MARKS THE BIRTH OF ITS FOUNDER.
MEANWHILE, IN WASHINGTON,
DEFENSE SECRETARY CHUCK HAGEL
WEIGHED IN AT A PENTAGON
BRIEFING.
>> NORTH KOREA HAS BEEN, WITH
ITS BELLICOSE RHETORIC, ITS
ACTION, HAS BEEN SKATING VERY
CLOSE TO A DANGEROUS LINE.
THEIR ACTIONS AND WORDS HAVE NOT
HELPED DEFUSE A COMBUSTIBLE
SITUATION.
>> Sreenivasan: NORTH KOREA HAS
WARNED ALL FOREIGN DIPLOMATS TO
LEAVE ITS CAPITAL, PYONGYANG.
BUT THE EUROPEAN UNION SAID
TODAY THERE'S NO NEED TO TAKE
SUCH STEPS.
IN ECONOMIC NEWS, THERE WAS WORD
THE U.S. FEDERAL RESERVE WANTS
TO KEEP LONGTERM INTEREST RATES
LOW THROUGH AT LEAST MID-YEAR.
THE NEWS CAME IN THE MINUTES OF
THE FED'S LAST MEETING.
THE REPORT GAVE WALL STREET AN
EARLY BOOST, AND IT NEVER LOOKED
BACK.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
GAINED 128 POINTS TO CLOSE AT
14,802.
THE NASDAQ ROSE 59 POINTS TO
CLOSE AT 3,297.
SATURDAY HOME MAIL DELIVERY IS
BACK ON FOR NOW.
THE U.S. POSTAL SERVICE SAID
TODAY IT'S DELAYING PLANS TO END
SATURDAY SERVICE BECAUSE
CONGRESS WILL NOT ALLOW THE
CHANGE.
BACK IN FEBRUARY, THE POSTAL
SERVICE SAID IT WOULD HAVE TO
CUT BACK TO FIVE-DAY-A-WEEK
DELIVERY BY AUGUST, TO REIN IN
COSTS.
THE AGENCY ENDED ITS LAST BUDGET
YEAR WITH A RECORD LOSS OF
NEARLY $16 BILLION.
THE UNIVERSITY OF CONNECTICUT
TODAY CELEBRATED ITS EIGHTH
NATIONAL CHAMPIONSHIP IN WOMEN'S
BASKETBALL.
THE HUSKIES BEAT LOUISVILLE IN A
ROUT LAST NIGHT IN NEW ORLEANS,
93 TO 60.
IT WAS THE MOST LOPSIDED WIN
EVER IN THE WOMEN'S NATIONAL
TITLE GAME.
LOUISVILLE HAD BEEN TRYING TO
ADD TO THE MEN'S CHAMPIONSHIP IT
WON THE NIGHT BEFORE.
U-CONNEMAI RNS THE ONLY SCHOOL
TO WIN BOTH TITLES IN THE SAME
SEASON.
THOSE ARE SOME OF THE DAY'S
MAJOR STORIES.
NOW, BACK TO JUDY.
>> Woodruff: WE TURN TO THE
OTHER BIG POLITICAL STORY OF
THIS DAY: GUN CONTROL
LEGISLATION AND A NEW PROPOSAL
FOR EXPANDING BACKGROUND CHECKS.
THE PRESIDENT SAID IN A
STATEMENT LATE TODAY THE PLAN
UNVEILED BY A PAIR OF SENATORS
DID NOT GO AS FAR AS HE WANTED,
BUT HE WELCOMED IT AS
SIGNIFICANT PROGRESS.
OTHER GUN CONTROL GROUPS SAID
THEY TOO HOPED IT COULD SERVE AS
A TIPPING POINT IN THE SENATE.
THE BIPARTISAN DEAL WAS
ANNOUNCED BY DEMOCRATIC SENATOR
JOE MANCHIN OF WEST VIRGINIA AND
REPUBLICAN SENATOR PAT TOOMEY OF
PESYLVNNANIA.
MANCHIN SAID THE DECEMBER SCHOOL
SHOOTINGS INEWTO NWN,
CONNECTICUT, DEMANDED A
RESPONSE.
>> THIS AMENDMENT WON'T EASE THE
PAIN.
IT WILL NOT EASE THE PAIN OF THE
FAMILIES WHO LOST THEIR CHILDREN
ON THAT HORRIBLE DAY.
BUT NOBODY HERE, AND I MEAN NOT
ONE OF US IN THIS GREAT, GREAT
CAPITOL OF OURS WITH A GOOD
CONSCIENCE COULD SIT BY AND NOT
TRY TO PREVENT A DAY LIKE THAT
FROM HAPPENING AGAIN.
AND I THINK THAT'S WHAT WE'RE
DOING.
>> Woodruff: UNDER THE PROPOSAL,
FEDERAL BACKGROUND CHECKS WOULD
BE EXPANDED TO INCLUDE GUN SHOW
AND ONLINE SALES.
ALL SUCH SALES WOULD HAVE TO BE
CHANNELED THROUGH LICENSED
FIREARMS DEALERS WHO'D BE
CHARGED WITH KEEPING RECORDS OF
THE TRANSACTIONS.
BUT, IN A MAJOR DIFFERENCE FROM
THE PRESIDENT'S PROPOSAL, THE
SENATORS' PLAN WOULD NOT REQUIRE
BACKGROUND CHECKS FOR PRIVATE
SALES BETWEEN INDIVIDUALS.
>> I DON'T CONSIDER CRIMINAL
BACKGROUND CHECKS TO BE GUN
CONTROL.
I THINK IT'S JUST COMMON SENSE.
IF YOU PASS A CRIMINAL
BACKGROUND CHECK YOU GET TO BUY
A GUN.
IT'S NO PROBLEM.
IT'S THE PEOPLE WHO FAIL A
CRIMINAL OR MENTAL HEALTH
BACKGROUND CHECK THAT WE DON'T
WANT HAVING GUNS.
>> Woodruff: SENATORS TOOMEY AND
MANCHIN ALSO WOULD CREATE A
NATIONAL COMMISSION ON MASS
VIOLEN
>> THIS COMMISSION IS GOING TO
BE MADE UP WITH PEOPLE WITH
EXPERTISE.
PEOPLE WHO HAVE EXPERTISE IN
GUNS, PEOPLE WHO HAVE EXPERTISE
IN MENTAL ILLNESS, PEOPLE WHO
HAVE EXPERTISE IN SCHOOL SAFETY
AND PEOPLE WHO HAVE EXPERTISE IN
VIDEO VIOLENCE.
>> Woodruff: THE MANCHIN-TOOMEY
PROPOSAL TAKES THE FORM OF AN
AMENDMENT TO A LARGER,
DEMOCRATIC BILL.
SENATE MAJORITY LEADER HARRY
REID PLANS AN INITIAL VOTE
TOMORROW, TO BRING THAT MEASURE
UP FOR DEBATE.
SETE RNAEPUBLICANS ARE DIVIDED
ON WHETHER TO TRY TO BLOCK THE
ACTION.
AND ON THE HOUSE SIDE, SPEAKER
JOHN BOEHNER WASN'T TIPPING HIS
HAND TODAY.
>> WE'LL WAIT AND SEE WHAT THE,
WHAT THE SENATE DOES.
IT'S ONE THING FOR TWO MEMBERS
TO COME TO SOME AGREEMENT.
IT DOESN'T SUBSTITUTE THE WILL
FROM THE OTHER 98 MEMBERS.
SO WE'LL WAIT AND SEE WHAT THE
SENATE DOES.
>> Woodruff: OTHERS WERE QUICK
TO REACT.
MAYORS AGAINST ILLEGAL GUNS--
FOUNDED BY NEW YORK MAYOR
MICHAEL BLOOMBERG-- SAID IT
STRONGLY SUPPORTS THE AMENDMENT.
BUT THE NATIONAL RIFLE
ASSOCIATION CONDEMNED THE
PROPOSAL, SAYING, "EXPANDING
BACKGROUND CHECKS AT GUN SHOWS
WILL NOT PREVENT THE NEXT
SHOOTING, WILL NOT SOLVE VIOLENT
CRIME AND WILL NOT KEEP OUR KIDS
SAFE IN SCHOOLS."
THE N.R.A. SAID IT WOULD SUPPORT
A PROPOSAL BY REPUBLICAN SENATOR
SUSAN COLLINS AND DEMOCRATIC
SENATOR PATRICK LEAHY.
IT CRACKS DOWN ON GUN
TRAFFICKING AND ON SO-CALLED
STRAW PURCHASES-- WHEN SOMEONE
BUYS FIREARMS FOR THOSE BARRED
FROM OWNING THEM.
ALL OF THIS, AS FIRST LADY
MICHELLE OBAMA RETURNED HOME TO
CHICAGO, ADDRESSING A CONFERENCE
ON YOUNG PEOPLE AND GUN
V SHOW THEM NOT JUST
WITH WORDS, BUT WITH ACTION THAT
THEY ARE NOT ALONE IN THIS
STRUGGLE.
WE NEED TO SHOW THEM THAT WE
BELIEVE IN THEM AND WE NEED TO
GIVE THEM EVERYTHING THEY NEED
TO BELIEVE IN THEMSELVES.
>> Woodruff: THE FIRST LADY ALSO
VISITED HARPER HIGH SCHOOL ON
CHICAGO'S SOUTH SIDE, WHERE 29
CURRENT OR FORMER STUDENTS HAVE
BEEN SHOT IN THE LAST YEAR.
EIGHT DIED.
LAST FEBRUARY, THE FIRST LADY
ATTENDED THE FUNERAL OF 15-YEAR-
OLD HADIYA PENDLETON.
SHE WAS KILLED JUST DAYS AFTER
PERFORMING WITH HER SCHOOL BAND
AT THE PRESIDENTIAL
INAUGURATION.
FOR A CLOSER LOOK AT THE
PERSISTENCE OF INNER CITY GUN
VIOLENCE, WE TURN TO PAUL
BARRETT.
HE IS THE AUTHOR OF "GLOCK, THE
RISE OF AMERICA'S GUN,"
AS WELL AS ASSISTANT MANAGING
EDITOR AND SENIOR WRITER AT
"BLOOMBERG BUSINESS WEEK"
MAGAZINE.
AND DEL McFADDEN, OUTREACH
COORDINATOR FOR THE COLUMBIA
HEIGHTS-SHAW COLLABORATIVE-- A
COMMUNITY SUPPORT ORGANIZATION
IN WASHINGTON, D.C.
WELCOME TO YOU BOTH.
AND, PAUL BARRETT, TO YOU
FIRST.
FOR ALL THE PUBLICITY AROUND
THESE HORRIBLE MASS SHOOTINGS,
WE KNOW MOST GUN VIOLENCE TAKES
PLACE AS ONE-ON-ONE SHOOTING.
TELL US, WHERE DO THESE TAKE
PLACE?
WHO IS DOING THE SHOOTINGS, AND
WHO ARE THE VICTIMS?
>> WELL, THERE'S A VERY WIDE
VARIETY, BUT YOU'RE ABSOLUTELY
RIGHT, AS A GENERAL MATTER, OUT
OF THE 30,000 GUN DEATHS WE HAVE
A YEAR, SOME 10,000 OR 11,000
ARE GUN HOMICIDES.
MANY OF THOSE TAKE PLACE IN
UNSAFE, POOR NEIGHBORHOODS, AND
OFTEN INVOLVE GUN PLAY BETWEEN
ONE GANG AND ANOTHER GANG, DRUG
TRAFFICKERS, BUT THEY ALSO-- YOU
HAVE GUN CRIME THAT TAKE PLAYS
ALL ACROSS THE COUNTRY IN OTHER
SETTINGS AS WELL.
>> Woodruff: I SHOULD HAVE
SAID, OF COURSE, SO MANY OF THE
GUN VIOLENCE IN THIS COUNTRY IS
SUICIDE, PEOPLE TURNING A GUN ON
THEMSELVES.
DELBERT McFADDEN, YOU WORK
EVERY DAY IN AN URBAN COMMUNITY
IN WASHINGTON, FIRST, TELL US
WHAT THE COLLABORATIVE DOES.
>> IT IS A NONPROFIT
ORGANIZATION LOCATED IN
NORTHWEST D.C.
WE STARTED IN 1996 SUPPORTING
FAMILIES, MAKING SURE THAT
FAMILIES WERE STRONG AND HEALTHY
THROUGH CAPACITY BUILDING AND
ADVOCACY.
NOW WE BRING THE WORKFORCE
DEVELOPMENT FOR EX-OFFENDERS,
AND WE ALSO HAVE YOUTH VIOLENCE
PREVENTION AND INTERVENTION
PROGRAM, WHICH I AM ONE OF THE
OUTREACH MANAGERS FOR.
>> Woodruff: AND WHAT DOES GUN
VIOLENCE LOOK LIKE TO YOU?
>> WELL, LET ME KIND OF SET THE
TONE.
IN THE LAST FIVE YEARS OF ME
BEING OUTREACH MANAGER FOR THIS
POSITION, WE HAVE BURIED 32
AFRICAN AMERICAN ANDULA TEBOW
YOUTH.
AND A LOT OF THE ISSUES, NOW
THAT WE HAVE SOC MEDIA, NOW THAT
WE HAVE SCHOOL CLOSURES IN THE
DISTRICT WHERE KIDS FROM
COMMUNITIES HAVE TO COEXIST
UNDER ONE ROOF, AND WE HAVE
FUNCTIONS THAT MAY HAPPEN WITH
KIDS COMING IN CONTACT, AND
THERE'S CONFLICT.
AND IT'S PECULIAR TO ME IN THE
SENSE OF WE WORK CLOSELY WITH
DIFFERENT PARTNERS.
AND FOR EACH ONE OF THOSE 32
YOUTH, WE CAN FIND THE BURIAL
ASSISTANCE FUNDS WITHIN 48 HOURS
TO BURY THOSE KIDS.
AND SO MY THING IS, WHY CAN'T WE
HAVE THE SAME RESOURCES TO
SUSTAIN LIFE?
>> Woodruff: TO KEEP THIS
VIOLENCE FROM HAPPENING.
WHAT WOULD YOU ADD TO, THAT PAUL
BARRETT.
HELP FILL OUT THAT PICTURE OF
WHAT'S GOING ON IN OUR INNER
CITIES NOW.
>> WELL, I THINK, AS WITH MANY
SOCIAL ISSUES, THERE'S A DOWN
SIDE AND AN UP SIDE, AND,
OBVIOUSLY, WE'VE GOT FAR TOO
MUCH GUN VIOLENCE IN THE INNER
CITIES.
WE HAVE FAR TOO MUCH GUN
VIOLENCE IN OTHER SEGMENTS OF
SOCIETY.
BUT IT'S ALSO IMPORTANT TO PUT
ON THE TABLE AND TO THINK ABOUT
AS WE ANALYZE HOW TO MOVE
FORWARD, THE FACT THAT IN THE
AGGREGATE, ACTUALLY, GUN
VIOLENCE IS GOING DOWN SHARPLY
AND HAS BEEN GOING DOWN SINCE
THE EARLY 1990s.
VIOLENT CRIME OVERALL IN THIS
COUNTRY IS AT ABOUT HALF THE
RATE IT WAS IN 1980.
AND BIG CITIES, THOUGH THEY
STILL DO HAVE POCKETS OF
TERRIBLE VIOLENCE AND SOCIAL
DYSFUNCTION, OVERALL, ARE
ACTUALLY SAFER TODAY THAN THEY
WERE 20 YEARS AGO.
>> Woodruff: IS IT KNOWN WHY
THAT'S HAPPENING?
>> WELL, THERE'S A GREAT DEAL OF
DEBATE OVER THAT.
IT IS ALMOST CERTAINLY NOT ANY
ONE FACTOR.
DETERMINING WHY CRIME LEVELS
SHIFT IS A VERY, VERY DIFFICULT
CHALLENGE FOR SOCIAL
SCIENTISTS.
BUT INGREDIENTS PROBABLY INCLUDE
HIGHER RATE OF INCARCERATION,
WHICH HAS BEEN VERY PRONOUNCED
OVER THE LAST COUPLE OF
DECADES.
SHIFTS IN POLICE PRACTICES,
TARGETING CERTAIN NEIGHBORHOOD
WHERE'S THERE'S A LOT OF
VIOLENCE AS OPPOSED TO JUST KIND
OF RANDOMLY PATROLLING THE
STREETS, AND ALSO IMPROVEMENTS
IN CERTAIN CITIES IN SOCIAL
PROGRAMS AND IN IMPROVING PUBLIC
HOUSING AND IN SOME CITIES THERE
HAS BEEN VERY, VERY CONCENTRATED
PUBLIC HOUSING THAT HAS BEEN
DISBURSED TO SOME DEGREE.
AND I'M SURE THE CIRCUMSTANCES
VARY A GREAT DEAL FROM CITY TO
CITY.
>> Woodruff: I SEE YOU NOD,
DELBERT McFADDEN, ABOUT WHAT
HE'S SAYING ABOUT THE REASONS
WHY VIOLENCE DECREASED.
HAVING SAID THAT, IT IS STILL
HAPPENING.
YOU CITED WHAT YOU SEE HERE IN
THE NATION'S CAPITAL.
WHAT IS CAUSING IT TO STILL
HAPPEN?
WHAT DO YOU SEE ARE THE DYNAMICS
IN THESE COMMUNITY BETWEENS
YOUNG PEOPLE THAT CAUSE PEOPLE
TO KILL SOMEBODY?
>> I THINK THERE ARE
ENVIRONMENTAL TRIGGERS,
"STRESSORS, DIFFERENT SITUATIONS
THAT MAY HAPPEN IN THESE
COMMUNITIES.
LIKE I STATED, IT'S A DIFFERENT
ENVIRONMENT OF FACTORS, RISK
FACTORS THAT PLAY A PART IN
THAT, AND WITH THE YOUTH IN THE
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, WHERE I
WORK, I THINK IT'S JUST THOSE
DIFFERENT ISSUES, THOSE NEEDS
THAT ARE NOT BEING MET WITHIN
THOSE HOUSEHOLDS.
THOSE NEEDS NOT BEING MET IN THE
COMMUNITY AND SCHOOL SYSTEM.
I THINK THAT'S A BIG PART OF
IT.
IF YOU LOOK AT THE INCARCERATION
RATE-- WE HAVE AROUND 2.4
MILLION AMERICANS ARRESTED.
ALMOST HALF OF THAT IS AFRICAN
AMERICAN.
SO WHEN YOU LOOK AT THOSE
HOUSEHOLDS, THOSE ARE
INDIVIDUALS THAT ARE NO LONGER
THERE.
THOSE ARE FATHERS.
THOSE ARE BROTHERS, AND THAT
REALLY PLAYS A PART IN THE
EROSION OF THOSE FAMILY UNITS.
>> Woodruff: AND TO THE EXTENT
GUNS, PAUL BARRETT, ARE PART OF
THIS, HOW DO THEY GET INJECTED
INTO THIS PICTURE?
HOW AVAILABLE ARE THEY?
>> WELL, WE HAVE 300 MILLION
FIREARMS IN PRIVATE HANDS IN THE
UNITED STATES.
SO WE ARE A SOCIETY THAT IS
PERMEATED BY GUNS AND GUN
OWNERSHIP.
THE VAST MAJORITY OF THOSE
FIREARMS OWNED LEGALLY AND ARE
NOT CAUSE ANYTHING PARTICULAR
PROBLEM, BUOF BUT MILLIONS ARE
OWNED ILLEGALLY, ARE ON THE
BLACK MARKET, AND ARE READILY
AVAILABLE IN NEIGHBORHOODS WHERE
THERE'S A LOT OF CRIME.
SO WE HAVE A VERY HIGH LEVEL OF
GUN HOMICIDE COMPARED TO SIMILAR
INDUSTRIALIZED SOCIETIES.
AND YET AT THE SAME TIME WE HAVE
AN IMPROVEMENT OVER TIME SO THAT
THE TRENDS ARE ACTUALLY QUITE
COMPLEX.
AND I THINK ONE THING WE NEED TO
FOCUS ON IS THE NEED TO ASK IF
THE CRIME RATES ARE COMING DOWN,
PARTICULARLY IN BIG CITIES, AS
THEY ARE, WHY IS THAT HAPPENING
AND HOW CAN THAT BE REPLICATED?
IF POLICE DEPARTMENTS ARE DOING
A SOMEWHAT BETTER JOB, WHAT ARE
THE KEYS TO THAT SUCCESS AND HOW
CAN IT BE REPEATED?
>> Woodruff: IT'S A HUGE
SUBJECT, AND WE ONLY HAVE A
LITTLE BIT OF TIME LEFT, BUT
DEL McFADDEN, WHAT ARE SOME OF
THE QUESTIONS THE REST OF US
SHOULD BE LOOKING AT RIGHT NOW,
IN ADDITION TO THE AVAILABLE OF
GUNS?
>> I THINK THERE'S AVAILABILITY,
AND I THINK WE NEED TO LOOK AT
THE OUTLETS THAT PLAY A PART IN
FUELING THE INFLUX OF THOSE
WEAPONS INTO THESE COMMUNITIES.
I THINK WE ALSO HAVE TO LOOK AT
THE MENTAL HEALTH PIECE.
I THINK WE'VE BEEN FAILING
TREMENDOUSLY LOOKING AT THE
PSYCHOLOGICAL TRAUMA THAT THESE
KIDS ENDURE OVER LONG PERIODS OF
TIME.
I HAVE YOUNG MEN GROUPS, AND
WHEN YOU TAKE TO THESE UNION MEN
YOU ASK THEM HOW MANY INDIVIDUAL
THEY KNEW OR WERE CLOSE WITH,
ASKING THEM HOW MANY HAVE PASSED
IN THE LAST FIVE YEARS.
THEY CAN RATTLE OFF 35 NAMES.
AND THAT IS SOMETHING THAT
DEFINITELY HAS TO BE LOOKED AT
IN A DEEPER SENSE.
>> Woodruff: THESE ARE YOUNG
MEN.
>> YES, THESE ARE YOUNG MEN.
I THINK, ALSO, ON THE SIDE OF
LAW ENFORCEMENT, WATCHING-- I
THINK THE CASE CLOSURE RATE IS
AROUND 93%.
IT'S VERY HIGH, WHICH DOES PLAY
A PART IN VIOLENCE REDUCTION.
BUT THERE'S NO WAY WE'RE GOING
TO WREST OUR WAY OUT OF THE
SITUATION.
WE'RE MAINLY DEALING WITH THE
BY-PRODUCTS OF GENERATIONAL
POVERTY, SOCIAL ECONOMIC
DISPARITIES AND DEPRIVATION.
BUT WE HAVE TO GET TO THE CORE
OF THESE ISSUES AND BUILD ON
SELF-WORTH AND POSITIVE
SELF-IMAGE.
>> Woodruff: DERK L McFADDEN
AND PAUL BARRETT, WE THANK YOU
BOTH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: NOW, THE SECOND OF A
TWO-PART LOOK AT EFFORTS TO
PREVENT FELONS FROM RETURNING TO
NEW YORK'S RIKER'S ISLAND JAIL
ONCE THEY'VE SERVED THEIR TIME.
LAST NIGHT, "NEWSHOUR" ECONOMICS
CORRESPONDENT PAUL SOLMAN
REPORTED ON A NEW WAY OF
CREATING PRIVATE FINANCING FOR
SUCH PUBLIC PROGRAMS.
TONIGHT, HE EXPLORES HOW THE
PROGRAM HOPES TO KEEP
PARTICIPANTS FROM ENDING UP IN
JAIL AGAIN.
IT'S PART OF HIS ON-GOING
REPORTING "MAKING SENSE OF
FINANCIAL NEWS."
>> Reporter: HIGH SCHOOL ON NEW
YORK CITY'S RIKER'S ISLAND, THE
WORLD'S LARGEST JAIL.
THOUGH THEY MAKE UP JUST 6% OF
THE POPULATION, THE TEEN INMATES
HERE POSE SOME OF THE BIGGEST
PROBLEMS.
>> THEY CONTRIBUTE TO 28% OF ALL
OF THE FIGHTS WHICH IS THE MOST
COMMON FORM OF MISCONDUCT IN A
JAIL SETTING.
>> Reporter: DORA SCHRIRO IS NY
CITY CORRECTIONS COMMISSIONER.
>> THIS GROUP, ONE OF THE AREAS
WHERE THEY ARE TERRIFICALLY WEAK
IS IN DECISION MAKING AND
PROBLEM SOLVING AND THEIR
PROPENSITY TO IMPULSIVELY RELY
ON FIGHTS RATHER THAN INSIGHT,
REALLY CONTRIBUTES TO HOW THEY
GOT HERE AND WHY IT IS THAT
EVERY ONE OUT OF TWO ARE LIKELY
TO COME BACK PRETTY QUICK.
>> Reporter: IN OTHER WORDS,
NEARLY 50% ARE BACK IN JAIL
WITHIN A YEAR OF THEIR RELEASE.
THAT'S WHY NEW YORK CITY
OFFICIALS HAVEUST  JLAUNCHED A
PROGRAM THAT PUTS EVERY 16- TO
18-YEAR-OLD ENTERING RIKER'S--
ALMOST AS SOON AS THE BARS SLAM
SHUT-- INTO A CLASS CALLED MORAL
RECONATION THERAPY, OR M.R.T., A
FORM OF BEHAVIORAL MODIFICATION
TO IMPROVE DECISION-MAKING.
>> IF YOU COULD GO BACK IN TIME,
AND CHANGE ONE THING, WHAT WOULD
IT BE, WHAT YEAR WOULD YOU GO
BACK TO, AND WHY?
>> Reporter: NOW, COGNITIVE
THERAPY LIKE M.R.T. ISN'T NEW;
IT'S BEEN AROUND FOR DECADES.
BUT IT IS NEW ON RIKER'S.
ALSO NEW: THE CASH-STRAPPED CITY
IS USING AN INNOVATIVE PRIVATE
INVESTMENT VEHICLE CALLED A
SOCIAL IMPACT BOND-- A TYPE OF
LOAN-- TO FUND IT.
>> WE'RE GOING START FROM HERE.
>> Reporter: M.R.T. STARTS
SMALL: DRAWING PICTURES OF
HAPPIER TIMES, LIKE A REAL OR
IMAGINED SKY DIVING JUMP.
TALKING ABOUT FEELINGS.
>> WHEN I GET NERVOUS I FEEL
LIKE I WANT TO SHUT DOWN AND NOT
DO ANYTHING.
>> Reporter: BECAUSE THEY'RE
MINORS, WE CAN'T SHOW STUDENT
FACES.
IT'S ALL PART OF A 12-STEP
PROCESS THAT MOVES FROM THE MOST
BASIC PSYCHOLOGICAL CONCEPTS TO
HIGHER GOALS.
STUDIES SHOW THAT M.R.T. CAN
REDUCE RECIDIVISM BY 20% TO 30%
AND THE MORE STEPS THEY MASTER,
THE MORE LIKELY THESE KIDS WILL
BE TO STAY OUT OF JAIL.
>> YOU GOT EVERYTHING WORKING
WITH YOU.
AND YOU'RE MOVING IN A POSITIVE
DIRECTION NOW.
>> Reporter: JAFAR ABBAS AND
KARIMAH NICHOLS ARE COUNSELORS
WITH THE OSBORNE ASSOCIATION,
THE NONPROFIT HIRED BY NEW YORK
TO RUN M.R.T. ON RIKER'S.
>> IT STARTS OUT SLOW WITH
PICTURES AND STUFF BUT AS IT
PROGRESSESHROU TGH 12 STEPS IS
THAT THEY GET MORE DIFFICULT,
AND THAT'S WHAT WE WANT.
WE WANT YOU TO GET OUT OF THE
BOX THAT YOU PUT YOURSELF IN AND
START LOOKING FOR HIGHER THINGS.
>> JUST THE FACT THAT THEY WERE
WILLING TO TALK IN GROUP.
LIKE, THAT IS A BIG STEP FOR
SOMEONE AT THAT AGE, THAT'S A
SIGN OF REAL MATURITY.
>> Reporter: AS WHEN THIS BOY
WAS ASKED TO RECOUNT HIS BEST OF
TIMES.
>> ONE IS WINNING MY FIRST
BASKETBALL CHAMPIONSHIP WHEN I
WAS IN MIDDLE SCHOOL.
SECOND IS I GOT MY FIRST JOB.
THIRD IS WHEN I GOT MY MIDDLE
SCHOOL DIPLOMA.
AND WHEN I WENT TO HIGH SCHOOL
AND GOT MY FIRST COMPUTER.
>> Reporter: AND WORST OF TIMES?
>> FIRST IS JAIL.
TWO IS GOING TO COURT AND NOT
KNOWING WHAT IS GOING TO HAPPEN
OR WHEN YOU GO HOME, THE JAIL
BUS RIDE, BEING IN A PLACE WHERE
YOU'RE TREATED LIKE AN ANIMAL,
YOU'RE LITERALLY CAGED UP MOST
OF THE TIME OF THE DAY.
>> DO YOU NOTICE THE CONNECTION
BETWEEN THE BEST TIMES IN YOUR
LIFE AND THE WORST TIMES?
WHAT'S THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN
THOSE TWO?
PATTERN?
>> WELL THE PATTERN WITH THE
WORST THINGS OF MY LIFE IS
THERE'S LITTLE THINGS I NEVER
THOUGHT WAS BIG UNTIL I CAME
HERE.
AND JAIL, I CAN'T CONTROL THE
OUTCOME THAT'S GOING ON WHEN I'M
HERE.
>> NONE OF THESE KIDS WANT TO BE
IN JAIL AND OUR MESSAGE TO THEM
IS YOU HAVE CONTROL.
>> Reporter: SUSAN GOTTESFELD
HELPS RUN THE OSBORNE
ASSOCIATION.
>> COGNITIVE BEHAVIORAL THERAPY
IS NOT A CODDLING, HUGGY,
TOUCHY, FEELY, FUZZY
INTERVENTION.
IT'S AN EVIDENCE BASED THERAPY
THAT WORKS FOR LOTS AND LOTS OF
DIFFERENT PEOPLE, FOR LOTS AND
LOTS OF DIFFERENT THINGS.
>> Reporter: WHAT'S THE KEY TO
THE COGNITIVE CHANGE?
>> IF WE WANT TO CHANGE OUTCOMES
WE HAVE TO CHANGE BEHAVIOR, AND
IF WE WANT TO CHANGE BEHAVIOR
FOR THE LONG RUN, WE HAVE TO
CHANGE THE WAY WE THINK, RIGHT?
AND FOR A LOT OF THESE KIDS ITS
A REALIZATION: I CAN CHOOSE TO
DO THAT IN A GOOD WAY OR I CAN
CHOOSE TO DO THAT IN A NEGATIVE
WAY.
>> Reporter: BUT WILL IT KEEP
ENOUGH KIDS FROM COMING BACK TO
RIKER'S TO SAVE THE CITY ENOUGH
MONEY TO PAY BACK INVESTORS?
IOT'S FACE IT: TRANSFORMATN
DOES NOT COME EASY.
AT RIKER'S, SAYS COMMISSIONER
SCHRIRO:
>> YOU NEVER KNOW FOR SURE UNTIL
THEY DAY THEY LEAVE HOW LONG
THEY'RE GOING TO BE THERE.
SO, WE REALLY NEEDED TO FIGURE
OUT HOW TO MAKE THE MOST OUT OF
EVERY DAY.
NOT WAIT FOR OUR NEXT CLASS TO
START, GRAB THEM, YOU KNOW, THE
MINUTE THEY GET IN, ENGAGE THEM
RIGHT AWAY, AND KEEP THEM
ENGAGED RIGHT TO THE TIME THEY
GO BACK OUT TO THE STREETS.
>> Reporter: THOSE RELEASED FROM
RIKER'S HAVE THE OPTION OF
CONTINUING THEIR 12-STEP THERAPY
AT OFFICES IN BROOKLYN AND THE
BRONX.
DWAYNE ARTHUR HAS BEEN SEEING
COUNSELOR VICTORIA PHILLIPS
SINCE GETTING OUT OF A TWO-WEEK
STINT AT RIKER'S IN JANUARY.
>> FOR THE ICE BREAKER TODAY I
WANT TO KNOW WHAT ARE SO OFME
THE THINGS THAT YOU TRY TO
CONTROL BUT CAN'T CONTROL?
>> UM, FIRST IS MY URGES.
SOMETIMEYOU S CAN'T CONTROL YOUR
EMOTIONS.
>> OKAY.
SOMETIMES YOU CAN'T CONTROL YOUR
EMOTIONS.
BUT CAN YOU CONTROL THE ACTIONS
THAT FOLLOW THE EMOTIONS?
>> YES.
>> AND SINCE YOU'VE BEEN HERE
ARE WE STARTING TO SEE THAT YOU
ARE CONTROLLING YOUR ACTIONS?
>> YES.
>> Reporter: BUT WHO HAS HE HURT
WHEN HE COULDN'T CONTROL THEM?
DWAYNE SHARED HIS WORKBOOK WITH
US.
>> OH, THE FIRST ONE WAS MY
MOTHER AND I'M HER SON AND I
HAVE DAMAGED THIS RELATIONSHIP
BY LETTING HER DOWN.
>> Reporter: BECAUSE YOU WOUND
UP IN RIKER'S?
>> YEAH.
>> Reporter: AND WHAT ELSE DOES
IT SAY?
>> TO BE A GOOD SUCCESSFUL SON.
THAT'S MY GOAL IN THIS
RELATIONSHIP.
>> Reporter: DWAYNE'S MOTHER,
SHARON GOVEIA, HAD WATCHED OUR
INTERVIEW.
WHAT DID HE MEAN DID YOU THINK
BY-- THAT HE HAD LET YOU DOWN?
>> BECAUSE HE KNOWS I HAVE HIGH
EXPECTATIONS FOR HIM.
I WANT HIM TO BE SOMETHING, I
WANT HIM TO, YOU KNOW, STRIVE
AND BE THE BEST THAT HE CAN BE,
YOU KNOW, SO.
>> Reporter: AND BEING IN
RIKER'S IS NOT A PART OF THAT...
>> EXACTLY.
BUT, I THINK HE LEARNED FROM IT.
>> Reporter: BUT TO LEARN,
YOU'VE GOT TO ATTEND.
IT TAKES DWAYNE ARTHUR MORE THAN
AN HOUR TO GET HERE.
>> PEOPLE CAN ONLY HELP
THEMSELVES.
BUT, IF THEY COME HERE, IT'S
GOING TO HELP THEM.
>> Reporter: OF 100 PEOPLE WHO
TAKE THIS PROGRAM, WHAT
PERCENTAGE, HOW MANY DO YOU
THINK WOULD NOT, WILL NOT, GO
BACK TO RIKER'S?
>> IF THEY CAME TO THE PROGRAM?
90 OF THEM.
90 OUT OF 100.
>> Reporter: BUT HOW MANY
ACTUALLY COME?
WHEN THIS TAPING WAS FIRST
SCHEDULED IN DECEMBER WE HAD
LINED UP ANOTHER BOY, NAMED
CARL, TO INTERVIEW.
BUT WE HAD TO RESCHEDULE FOR
FEBRUARY, AND BY THEN CARL HAD
STOPPED COMING REGULARLY.
THAT RAISES A RED FLAG TO SOCIAL
IMPACT BOND SKEPTICS LIKE MARC
ROSENMAN.
>> ULTIMATELY IT WILL RESULT IN
CREAMING.
>> Reporter: CREAMING?
>> CHERRY PICKING PARTICIPANTS,
SELECTING THE EASIEST PEOPLE TO
WORK WITH AND NO MATTER HOW WELL
INTENTIONED YOU ARE, IF YOU KNOW
ULTIMATELY THAT BEING ABLE TO
REPAY YOUR INVESTORS IS
DEPENDENT ON HOW WELL YOU MEET A
NARROW BENCHMARK, THE TEMPTATION
OF BEGINNING TO OPERATE IN A WAY
THAT IS MORE LIKELY TO PRODUCE
THOSE OUTCOMES I THINK, IS
SIGNIFICANT.
>> Reporter: THAT'S GAMING THE
SYSTEM?
>> IT WILL BE GAMING THE SYSTEM.
>> Reporter: BUT AS SUSAN
GOTTESFELD POINTS OUT, THE
M.R.T. PROGRAM, AND THE SOCIAL
IMPACT BOND ISSUE THAT FUNDS IT,
SEEK TO REACH EVERY YOUNG PERSON
ON RIKER'S ISLAND, PERIOD.
AND THE EVALUATION WILL LOOK AT
WHETHER, OVERALL, IT REDUCES
RECIDIVISM, OR IT DOESN'T.
THE SKEPTIC WOULD SAY, "THESE
ARE GREAT GOALS BUT YOU'RE
LIKELY NOT TO ACHIEVE THEM."
>> WELL, I WOULD SAY THAT I
BELIEVE WE WILL.
WE SEE CHANGE EVERY DAY IN OUR
CLASSROOMS AND, YOU KNOW, IN A
YEAR FROM NOW, TWO YEARS FROM
NOW, WE'LL REALLY SEE FOR SURE.
>> Reporter: AND SO WE WILL.
STAY TUNED.
>> Woodruff: NEXT, A TREASURE
TROVE OF CUBIST ART AND A RECORD
GIFT FOR THE METROPOLITAN MUSEUM
OF ART IN NEW YORK.
MARGARET WARNER HAS MORE.
>> Warner: PHILANTHROPIST
LEONARD LAUDER-- AN HEIR TO THE
ESTEE LAUDER ESTATE-- IS GIVING
THE MET HIS ENTIRE COLLECTION OF
CUBIST ART.
THE 78 PAINTINGS, DRAWINGS AND
SCULPTURES ARE VALUED TOGETHER
AT MORE THAN $1 BILLION.
THEY INCLUDE 33 PIECES BY PABLO
PICASSO, LIKE "WOMAN IN AN ARM
CHAIR" FROM 1913.
17 WORKS BY GEORGES BRAQUE,
INCLUDING "BOTTLE OF RUM" FROM
1914 AND OTHER MAJOR PIECES BY
FERNAND LEGER AND JUAN GRIS.
FOR MORE ON THE COLLECTION AND
ITS SIGNIFICANCE, WE TURN TO
REBECCA RABINOW, A CURATOR FROM
THE MET'S DEPARTMENT OF MODERN
AND CONTEMPORARY ART.
SHE JOINS US FROM SAN FRANCISCO.
THANK YOU FOR JOINING US.
WHAT IS THE-- HOW UNUSUAL AND
HOW IMPORTANT IS A BODY OF WORKN
ITSELF, ANALSOD  FOR THE MET?
>> IT'S EXTRAORDINARY IN EVERY
POSSIBLE WAY.
ON THE ONE HAND, YOU HAVE EYE
COLLECTOR WHO HAS REALLY FOCUSED
SO INTENTLY, AND SO IN-DEPTH AT
ONE PARTICULAR MOMENT BUYING THE
BEST OF THE BEST.
SO IT'S AN EXTRAORDINARY
COLLECTION.
AND IN GIVING IT TO THE
METROPOLITAN MUSEUM OF ART,
MR. LAUDER HAS TRANSFORMED OUR
HOLDINGS.
ESPECIALLY THE 20th CENTURY
ART.
HE UNDERSTANDS THIS WAS A BIG
LACK OF THE COLLECTION, AND BY
GIVES US EXTRAORDINARY WORKS,
CUBIST WORKS IT CAN CAN HELP I
TELL THE IMPORTANT STORY OF
MODERN ART.
HE ALSO UNDERSTANDS IT IS AN
ENCYCLOPEDIC MUSEUM.
SO FROM OUR POINT OF VIEW, THIS
IS A TRANSFORMATIVE GIFT OF THE
HIGHEST CALIBER.
>> Woodruff: AND HELP US
UNDERSTAND CUBISM.
IT'S OFTEN DESCRIBED, OF COURSE,
AS REVOLUTIONARY.
WHAT WAS REVOLUTIONARY IN THE
WAY CUBIST ARTISTS PORTRAYED THE
WORLD?
>> SO, YOU'RE TALKING ABOUT
GEORGE BRACK, AND PABLO PICASSO,
TWO YOUNG ARTISTS WORKING IN
PARIS.
IN 1908, THERE WAS AN EXHIBITION
OF BRACK'S WORK, AT A GALLERY IN
PARIS.
AND IT WAS AT THAT GALLERY THAT
A CRITIC COINED THE TERM
"CUBISM."
HE FELT BRACK WAS USING
GEOMETRIC SHAPES TO REPRODUCE
OBJECTS OF ART IN THAT SENSE.
BY 1909, BRACK AND PICASSO WERE
INSEPARABLE.
THEY BECAME GREAT FRIENDS.
THEY WENT TO EACH OTHER'S
STUDIOS EACH DAY, THEY
VACATIONED TOGETHER, AND THEY
BEGAN TO LOOK AT ART AND ART'S
POSSIBILITY IN AN ENTIRELY NEW
WAY.
THEY BEGAN TO EMPHASIZE THAT
TWO-DIMENSIONAL ASPECT OF A
PAINTED SURFACE.
THEY WERE INTERESTED IN BREAK UP
CONTOURS AND CREATING A FACETTED
SURFACE, LOOKING AT ONE WORK OF
ART FROM MULTIPLE POINTS OF VIEW
SIMULTANEOUSLY.
SO WHAT THE CUBIST DID WAS
ABSOLUTELY REVOLUTIONARY FOR
THEMSELVES, BUT ALSO IN THE WAY
IT INSPIRED OTHER ARTISTS.
>> LET'S TAKE PICASSO'S "NUDE
WOMAN IN A CHAIR."
HOW DOES THAT ILLUSTRATE CUBISM
AS YOU JUST DESCRIBED IT.
>> THAT PAINTING WHICH IS A
MASTERPIECE IN AND OF ITSELF,
ABOUT THREE FEET TALL, IS A
PERFECT EXAMPLE OF HOW CUBISM
BRIDGED LATE 19th CENTURY
ART INTO THE 20th CENTURY,
BECAUSE PICASSO WAS VERY
INTERESTED IN THE ART OF
SEZAHN.
SEZAHN HAD RECENTLY DIED.
THERE WAS A RET PROSPECT 55.
AND WHAT PICASSO IS DOING IN
THAT PAINTING IS HE IS LOOKING
AT CEZAN'S PAINTINGS OF HIS OWN
LIFE.
BUT NOW PICASSO IS STARTING TO
BREAK APART THE FORMS.
IT'S CLEARLY IDENTIFIABLE AS A
WOMAN AND YET HE'S SHOWING HER
FROM MULTIPLE PERSPECTIVES
SIMULTANEOUSLY.
HE'S STARTING TO REDUCE OR
SIMPLIFY PARTS OF HER ANATOMY
INTO GEOMETRIC FORMS.
THAT PAINTING REALLY IN MANY
WAYS IS A WONDERFUL LINK.
IT SHOWS PICASSO LOOKING BACK TO
WHAT CAME BEFORE AND ALSO
LOOKING FORWARD TO SEE HIS NEW
DIRECTION.
>> Warner: COULD ANY MUSEUM,
EVEN WITH A LARGE BUDGET FOR
ACQUISITIONS, GO OUT ON THE
MARKET TODAY, AND ACQUIRE A
COLLECTION OF THIS KIND OF SIZE
AND DEPTH IN ONE FIELD?
>> IT WOULD BE ABSOLUTELY
IMPOSSIBLE TO REPLICATE
MR. LAUDER'S COLLECTION.
THESE IMPORTANT CUBIST WORKS ARE
SIMPLY NOT ON THE MARKET.
IN PRIVATE HANDS.
HIS COLLECTION IS NOT ONLY ABOUT
FANTASTIC WORKS OF ART.
HE BOUGHT THE BEST OF THE BEST.
BUT HE WAS A SCHOLAR COLLECTOR
IN MANY WAYS.
HE WAS INTERESTED NOT ONLY IN
SORT OF THE FORMAL VALUES, HOW
THESE PICTURES LOOK, HOW THEY
FUNCTION WITHIN AN ARTIST'S
CAREER, BUT INTERESTED IN THEM
AS OBJECTS AS WELL AND
HISTORIES, AND THIS COLLECTION
HAS WORKS THAT PASSED THROUGH
THE MOST IMPORTANT CUBIST HANDS,
THE MOST IMPORTANT CUBIST
COLLECTOR'S WORKS.
HE HAD PICTURES IN HIS
COLLECTION THAT WERE EXHIBITED
IN HISTORIC EXHIBITION, LIKE THE
ARMORY EXHIBITION OF 1913, WHICH
INTRODUCED MODERNISM TO AMERICAN
AUDIENCES.
SO HIS COLLECTION IS A
COLLECTION OF FIRSTS.
IT'S A COLLECTION OF
MASTERPIECES.
IT IS ABSOLUTELY IMPOSSIBLE TO
REPLICATE, AND WE ARE JUST
THRILLED TO BE ABLE TO HAVE IT
AT THE MET FOR THE ENJOYMENT OF
EVERYONE.
>> Warner: AND THE PUBLIC WILL
GET TO SEE THIS NEXT YEAR IN A
SPECIAL EXHIBITION.
THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> Woodruff: AND YOU CAN FIND A
SLIDE SHOW OF WORKS FROM THE
LAUDER COLLECTION ONLINE ON ART
BEAT.
>> Ifill: FINALLY TONIGHT, A
CONVERSATION WITH A CUBAN
DISSIDENT.
>> ONE OF THE MOST FAMOUS LIVING
CUBANS NOT NAMED CASTRO.
FOR THE SIX YEARS, THE ONLINE
POSTS ABOUT LIFE IN CUBA HAVE
REACTED MILLIONS OF READERS IN
THE WORLD.
IN 2002, SANCHEZ FLED CUBE ABUT
UNLIKE MOST CUBANS WHO LEAVE,
SHE RETURNED TWO YEARS LATER TO
PRESS FOR CHANGE ON THE ISLAND.
THE LAST DECADE HAS SEEN
CHANGE.
EARLIER THIS YEAR, THE
GOVERNMENT LIFTED THE TRAVEL BAN
ALLOWING MOST CITIZENS FREEDOM
TO COME AND GO.
SANCHEZ IS NOW IN THE MIDDLE OF
A THREE-CONTINENT TOUR WHERE
SHE'S OPENLY CRITICIZED THE
CUBAN GOVERNMENT.
WHILE IN NEW YORK, SHE SAT DOWN
WITH ONE OF OUR MEDIA COLLEAGUE
AS WLIW IN NEW YORK.
HE TALKED WITH SANCHEZ ABOUT
LIFE UNDER A TOTALITARIAN RE.
>> YOU WROTE WHEN YOU RETURNED
TO CUBE AWE PROMISED YOURSELF
YOU WOULD LIVE IN CUBA AS A FREE
PERSON, REGARDLESS OF THE
CONSEQUENCES.
WHAT HAVE BEEN THE
>> ( translated ): WELL, YES,
CONSEQUENCES.
I TOLD MYSELF THAT I WOULDN'T
>> ( translated ): WELL, YES,
RETURN TO THE MASK, I WOULDN'T
I TOLD MYSELF THAT I WOULDN'T
RETURN TO THE PRETENSE.
RETURN TO THE MASK, I WOULDN'T
I TBHOWLTD RETURN TO THE
RETURN TO THE PRETENSE.
SILENCE.
I TBHOWLTD RETURN TO THE
FROM THAT MOMENT A NEW CHAPTER
SILENCE.
BEGAN IN MY LIFE, ONE THAT
FROM THAT MOMENT A NEW CHAPTER
BROUGHT WITH IT MANY REPRISALS
BEGAN IN MY LIFE, ONE THAT
AND CONSEQUENCES.
BROUGHT WITH IT MANY REPRISALS
FORECAST BEING WATCHED.
AND CONSEQUENCES.
BEING STOPPED BY STATE SECURITY,
FORECAST BEING WATCHED.
KNOWING THAT ANYWHERE I GO THERE
BEING STOPPED BY STATE SECURITY,
COULD BE SOMEONE INFORMING,
KNOWING THAT ANYWHERE I GO THERE
FILMING AND PHOTOGRAPHING WHAT I
COULD BE SOMEONE INFORMING,
DO, AND LOSING MANY FRIENDS,
FILMING AND PHOTOGRAPHING WHAT I
FRIENDS WHO ARE AFRAID TO COME
DO, AND LOSING MANY FRIENDS,
CLOSE TO MY HOUSE OR TO ME.
FRIENDS WHO ARE AFRAID TO COME
ALSO, THE ARBITRARY DETENTIONS,
CLOSE TO MY HOUSE OR TO ME.
THE ARRESTS, THE INSULTZ, THE
ALSO, THE ARBITRARY DETENTIONS,
THREAT, THE NOT BEING ABLE TO
THE ARRESTS, THE INSULTZ, THE
LEAVE MY COUNTRY FOR FIVE
THREAT, THE NOT BEING ABLE TO
YEARS.
LEAVE MY COUNTRY FOR FIVE
>> Reporter: HOW MUCH HAVE
YEARS.
THINGS CHANGED IN CUBA SINCE
>> Reporter: HOW MUCH HAVE
FIDELL HANDED OVER POWER TO HIS
THINGS CHANGED IN CUBA SINCE
WHERE THE BROTHER RAUL, ALMOST
FIDELL HANDED OVER POWER TO HIS
SEVEN YEARS AGO.
WHERE THE BROTHER RAUL, ALMOST
>> I CAN CATEGORICALLY SAY
SEVEN YEARS AGO.
NOTHING HAS ADVANCED IN TERMS OF
>> I CAN CATEGORICALLY SAY
CIVIL RIGHTS.
NOTHING HAS ADVANCED IN TERMS OF
I DO NOTICE A CHANGE IN THE
CIVIL RIGHTS.
REPRESSION.
I DO NOTICE A CHANGE IN THE
THERE HAS BEEN A CHANGE IN STYLE
REPRESSION.
RATHER THAN THE CHANGE FOR THE
THERE HAS BEEN A CHANGE IN STYLE
BETTER.
RATHER THAN THE CHANGE FOR THE
RAUL'S STYLE IS REPRESSING
BETTER.
WITHOUT LEADING LEGAL FINGER
RAUL'S STYLE IS REPRESSING
PRINTS.
WITHOUT LEADING LEGAL FINGER
PEOPLE ARE CONDEMNED TO LONG
PRINTS.
PRISON STBSZ, WHILE RAUL HAS
PEOPLE ARE CONDEMNED TO LONG
USED MORE CULT METHODS.
PRISON STBSZ, WHILE RAUL HAS
>> HOW DO YOU RESPOND TO THOSE
USED MORE CULT METHODS.
WHO SAY THE VERY FACT THAT
>> HOW DO YOU RESPOND TO THOSE
YOU'RE HERE SPEAK FREELY AND
WHO SAY THE VERY FACT THAT
CRITICALLY ABOUT THE CUBAN
YOU'RE HERE SPEAK FREELY AND
GOVERNMENT SHOWS THERE HAVE BEEN
CRITICALLY ABOUT THE CUBAN
PROFOUND CHANGES IN CUBA?
GOVERNMENT SHOWS THERE HAVE BEEN
>> ( translated ): I THINK THE
PROFOUND CHANGES IN CUBA?
FACT THEY AND SEVERAL OTHER
>> ( translated ): I THINK THE
ACTIVISTS HAVE BEEN ABLE TO
FACT THEY AND SEVERAL OTHER
LEAVE CUBA IN THE LAST FEW WEEKS
ACTIVISTS HAVE BEEN ABLE TO
AND HAVE BEEN EXPRESS OURSELVES
LEAVE CUBA IN THE LAST FEW WEEKS
THROUGH THE MICROPHONES OF THE
AND HAVE BEEN EXPRESS OURSELVES
WORLD IS NOT A SIGN OF
THROUGH THE MICROPHONES OF THE
TRANSFORMATION BUT OF WEAKNESS.
WORLD IS NOT A SIGN OF
THE CUBAN GOVERNMENT CAN NO
TRANSFORMATION BUT OF WEAKNESS.
LONGER HOLD BACK WHAT'S
THE CUBAN GOVERNMENT CAN NO
HAPPENING.
LONGER HOLD BACK WHAT'S
IT CAN'T STOP IT FOR MANY
HAPPENING.
REASONS, BUT FUNDAMENTALLY,
IT CAN'T STOP IT FOR MANY
BECAUSE OF THE GROWING NUMBER OF
REASONS, BUT FUNDAMENTALLY,
CRITICAL VOICES WITHIN CUBA, AND
BECAUSE OF THE GROWING NUMBER OF
ALSO BECAUSE TECHNOLOGY HAS
CRITICAL VOICES WITHIN CUBA, AND
ALLOWED US TO GAIN VISIBILITY,
ALSO BECAUSE TECHNOLOGY HAS
WHICH IS PROTECTING US.
ALLOWED US TO GAIN VISIBILITY,
SOCIAL NETWORKS LIKE FACEBOOK
WHICH IS PROTECTING US.
AND TWITTER NOW TERSE AS A
PROTECTIVE SHIELD FOR US.
>> Reporter: BUT AS YOU KNOW,
A LOT OF THE SUPPORTERS OF THE
GOVERNMENT SAY THAT THERE HASN'T
BEEN A MANIFESTATION, A
REBELLION AGAINST THE SYSTEM,
BECAUSE MANY CUBEANS, OR MOST
CUBANS, IF NOT ALL, SUPPORT
SYSTEM AND THEY SUPPORT IT
BECAUSE THEY WANT TO PROTECT THE
SOCIAL CONQUESTS OF THE
REVOLUTION, LIKE HEALTH CARE AND
FREE EDUCATION.
HOW DO YOU RESPOND TO THAT?
>> ( translated ): WELL, LET
ME RESPOND WITH A METAPHOR I
LIKE VERY MUCH.
THE METAPHOR OF THE BIRD IN THE
CAGE.
TO SAY THAT CUBANS HAVE SETTLED
FOR A CHANGE OF LIMITED
LIBERTIES IN EXCHANGE FOR SOME
BIRD SEED AND WATER-- WHICH
WOULD BE IN THIS CASE THE
EDUCATION AND HEALTH CARE
SYSTEMS -- I THINK WOULD BE VERY
UNJUST.
IT'S VERY UNJUST TO REDUCE US TO
A CONDITION OF SERVEILITY, OF
INCAPABLE OF ENJOYING LIBERTY.
THIS IS COMPLETELY FALSE.
CUBEANS WANT TO FLY.
WE WANT TO LEAVE THE CAGE, JUST
AS ANY INDIVIDUAL IN ANY PART
PLANET WOULD WANT.
THE PROBLEM IS THE CAGE IS VERY
WELL MADE.
THE BARS VERY THICK.
AND BY THE WAY, NEITHER THE BIRD
FEED NOR THE WATER IS ALL THAT
WONDERFUL, EITHER.
>> Reporter: THE MAN WHO MANY
CONSIDERED THE HAVEL OF CUBE
ADIED LAST YEAR IN A CAR
ACCIDENT UNDER VERY MYSTERIOUS
CIRCUMSTANCES.
ARE YOU IN ANY WAY AFRAID OF
YOUR PHYSICAL WELL-BEING, OF
YOUR SAFETY, WHEN YOU RETURN TO
CUBA?
>> ( translated ): WHEN YOU
LIVE UNDER A TOTALITARIAN REGIME
ND AKNOW THAT DANGER AND RISK
CAN COME FROM EVERYWHERE, THE
FEAR OF DEATH, OF PHYSICAL HARM,
OF STRESS TO YOUR FAMILY, OF
SOCIALND A PHYSICAL DEATH CAN
LEAD YOU TO PARALYSIS, TO DOING
NOTHING, IN THE HOPE THAT ONE
DAY, THE REGIME WILL FORGET
ABOUT YOU OR FORGIVE YOU.
OR YOU CAN SIMPLY CONTINUE TO
STRUGGLE.
THERE ARE MANY WAYS TO REACT TO
FEAR.
I TELL MY FRIENDS THAT SINCE I
WAS VERY LITTLE, WHENEVER
SOMETHING FRIGHTENED ME, I WOULD
RUN TOWARDS IT.
OTHERS MAY HIDE OR STAY UNDER
THE BED, BUT FEAR WILL NEVER
STOP ME FROM DOING WHAT I DO.
>> Reporter: WHAT ARE YOUR
HOPES FOR THE FUTURE OF CUBA?
>> I WOULD BE HAPPY WITH A
PLURALISTIC CUBE AAN INCLUSIVE
CUBA THAT CAN FIT ALL CUBANS.
BASICALLY A CUBA THAT IS
DIFFICULT TO GOVERN, WHERE THERE
ARE LONG DISCUSSIONS IN THE
LEGISLATURE, JUST TO CHANGE ONE
LINE OF A LAW, AND WHERE THOSE
WHO GOVERN DON'T SEE THEMSELVES
AS CHOSEN MESIGH AS, OR THINK
THEY HAVE THE RIGHT TO EXERCISE
ANY POWER OTHER THAN THAT GRANT
THEM AS SOVEREIGN CITIZENS.
I WOULD BE HAPPY WITH THAT, WITH
A CUBA THAT ACCEPTS PLURALITY
AND ACCEPTS IT.
>> Ifill: YOU CAN FIND A LINK TO
THE FULL VERSION OF THAT
INTERVIEW ON OUR WEBSITE.
>> Woodruff: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY:
PRESIDENT OBAMA UNVEILED HIS
2014 BUDGET PLAN, CALLING FOR
SAVINGS IN MEDICARE AND SOCIAL
SECURITY, PLUS MORE TAX HIKES
FOR THE WEALTHY.
AND A BIPARTISAN PROPOSAL
EMERGED IN THE SENATE, EXPANDING
BACKGROUND CHECKS TO NEARLY ALL
GUN BUYERS.
>> Ifill: IT'S SPRING IN
WASHINGTON, AND THE CHERRY
BLOSSOMS HAVE ARRIVED.
HARI SREENIVASAN TELLS US HOW
SCIENTISTS ARE WORKING TO KEEP
THE TREES BLOOMING.
>> Sreenivasan: MORE THAN ONE
MILLION VISITORS FLOCK TO
WASHINGTON, D.C. EACH SPRING TO
VIEW THE CHERRY TREES.
BUT THE STOCK OF ORIGINAL TREES
IS RAPIDLY DEPLETING.
ON SCIENCE WEDNESDAY, LEARN
ABOUT THE EFFORT TO NOT JUST
REPLACE THEM, BUT TO CLONE THEM.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR
WEBSITE: newshour.pbs.org.
GWEN?
>> Ifill: AND THAT'S THE
"NEWSHOUR" FOR TONIGHT.
ON THURSDAY, WE'LL COVER THE
FULL SENATE DEBATE ON NEW GUN
LAWS.
I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Woodruff: AND I'M JUDY
WOODRUFF.
WE'LL SEE YOU ONLINE AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING.
THANK YOU AND GOOD NIGHT.